---
aliases: [Overview]
tags:
  - Class/Literature-Note/Lecture
  - Topic/-
  - Context/MD1
author(s): 
key_concepts: 
presentation-datetime: 
learning-outcomes:
---


# Overview
## Learning Outcomes
1. Explain the skin's role as a barrier to infection.
2. List the microbiological causes of skin infections and outline their pathogenesis.
3. Discuss the clinical presentation of superficial skin infections and traumatic wound infections.
4. Discuss the investigations and management strategies for these superficial and traumatic skin infections.
## Outline/Sections

## Key Terms & Concepts
Most Common Pathogens
- Bacterial
	- Staphylococcus aureus

# Notes
Most common causes of skin infection:
- Bacterial Pathogens:
	- Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA and MRSA): The most common pathogen responsible for skin infections, including cellulitis, abscesses, impetigo, and folliculitis.
	- Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A Strep): Causes cellulitis, impetigo, erysipelas, and necrotizing fasciitis and Other beta-haemolytic streptococci: S.dysgalactiae (Group C/G), S.agalactiae (Group B – more common diabetics/elderly)
	- Other: Gram negative organisms (Enterobacterales (e.g. E.coli) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa), Water organisms (Aeromonas and Vibrio species), Anaerobes (C.perfringens), Mycobacteria
- Fungal Pathogens (most common):
	- Candida and related species: Cause superficial infections like thrush and diaper rashes, as well as skin folds infections (intertrigo).
	- Dermatophytes (e.g., Trichophyton, Microsporum, Epidermophyton): Cause tinea infections (e.g., ringworm, athlete’s foot).
	- Malassezia – pityriasis versicolor
- Viral Pathogens (most common):
	- Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV): Causes cold sores, genital herpes, and herpetic whitlow
	- Varicella-Zoster Virus (VZV): Causes chickenpox and shingles, both of which can involve the skin.
	- Enterovirus: some strains will cause hand foot and mouth or generalised eruptions

# Questions

## My Questions
## Revision Questions




